---
layout:     post
title:      Khabib Nurmagomedov vs Tony Ferguson — It’s Actually Happening?
date:       2018-03-28 12:31:19
summary:    The pair have been booked to fight for the fourth time. Now scheduled to headline UFC 223 on April 7th in Brooklyn.
categories: blog
---

The last time Nurmagomedov stepped inside the octagon he scored an especially impressive decision win, with the three judges [scorecards](https://twitter.com/shaunalshatti/status/947356482810474497) reading 30–25, 30,25, and 30–24. That means that in a fight where Khabib scored no knockdowns, and never attempted a submission, two judges gave him two 10–8 rounds and Glenn Trowbridge thought he won every round by a 10–8 margin. If we use scorecards as the metric[^1]  it was the most lopsided three round decision victory in UFC history.

His opponent, Edson Barboza, a world-class striker and knockout artist, found himself with his back pinned against the cage and taking damaging ground and pound for the majority of the fight. This is how Nurmagomedov wins fights. He pressures his opponents, regardless of striking prowess or style, drags them to the ground, and punches them until he decides he wants to end the fight.

> If UFC approve, I can fight with these guys same night.

These were Khabib's words when asked in the [post-fight press conference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bwOMObQxIdQ) about his next opponent and who he would rather face between Ferguson and Conor McGregor, “I swear I don’t joke” he continued. A claim like this would normally be written off as routine trash talk, or another ego driven remark used by fighters to market future fights. This is not hyperbole from Khabib, he routinely makes the best fighters in the world appear unprepared. We know this because he employs a habit of talking to his opponents during fights, with encouraging words for Michael Johnson such as “You have to give up”. Followed by spending his supposed 60 seconds of recovery time between rounds making his case to UFC president Dana White for a title shot. Simply because he can.

For all of his dominance inside the octagon, Khabib has displayed damaging fragility outside of it. Moving his camp from his native Dagestan to train in Southern California alongside a roster of current and former UFC champions&mdash;including current light heavyweight champion Daniel Cormier&mdash;at the American Kickboxing Academy, Khabib has found himself sidelined for more than 2 years since entering the UFC in 2011. Along with a track record of creating some of the most elite fighters in all of mixed martial arts, AKA has also garnered a reputation of having fighters pull out of fights due to injury. Former heavyweight champion Cain Velasquez, who has trained at AKA during his entire career, has not competed in nearly three years due to recurring back issues.

Not being able to get out of his own way, Nurmagomedov has also had a history of weight cut issues. Most notably when he experienced [kidney failure](http://mmajunkie.com/2017/03/khabib-nurmagomedov-hospitalized-after-weight-cut-ufc-209-title-fight-with-tony-ferguson-off) while trying to make weight for a fight last March at UFC 209 with none other than Tony Ferguson. Complicating matters further, Nurmagomedov had been recorded eating tiramisu during his training camp leading up to the fight, something that did not go over so well UFC management and fans alike. Ironically, it’s worth mentioning that the UFC could have cut the footage to paint this picture, which explains why Nurmagomedov later challenged the video, as did his head coach Javier Mendez. Tiramisu-gate[^2] served to highlight a flaw in his preparation. It is not a coincidence then, that Nurmagomedov hired a full-time nutritionist prior to his fight with Edson Barboza. The change seems to have worked, with Nurmagomedov going as far as to say he is considering a move down to 145 pounds in the future, following the ease of his most recent weight cut.

The biggest doubts about Nurmagomedov are about his battles leading up to the night of the fight. If he is able to make it to the octagon on April 7th, there is no evidence to suggest he will not have his way with Tony Ferguson. For the fans, the moment to exhale is when the cage closes, the rest seems like a foregone conclusion.

## Tony Ferguson
Using a number of fighting clichés to describe Tony Ferguson’s style is not uncommon. “Unorthodox” and “creative” are often overused, not for a lack of understanding, but rather because there exists no other fighter like him in the UFC. The aptly nicknamed “El Cucuy”&mdash;translating from Spanish to “The Boogeyman”&mdash;is known for his relentless pace, unlimited gas tank, and deadly submission finishes. Under jiu-jitsu legend Eddie Bravo he has amassed 6 submission wins during his UFC career, all of them coming during his current 10 fight win streak. That ten fight win streak ranks 5th longest among active fighters, behind current lightweight champion Max Holloway (12), Jon Jones, Demetrius Johnson, and Georges St-Pierre, who all have 13 consecutive wins. The man closest to him on that list? Khabib Nurmagomedov, with 9 consecutive UFC wins&mdash;in 9 UFC fights, of course.

Ferguson boasts a strong wrestling resume, winning the 2006 NCWA[^3] National Wrestling Championship in the 165-pound division. This is, of course, important because Ferguson will look to lean on his wrestling background to avoid finding himself somewhere he doesn’t want to be during this fight. On paper, for a fighter with a grappling prowess such as Ferguson, finding himself on the canvas is often an ideal scenario, allowing him to use his submission skills to finish fights. In this fight however, being on the canvas means he likely will have allowed the Dagestani fighter to impose his will.

Let’s assume Nurmagomedov will be successful in taking Ferguson down at some point in the fight, he has been with all of his opponents in the UFC. The question then becomes whether or not Ferguson can get back to his feet, or even unthinkably submit Nurmagomedov. The latter seems an impossible task, the former much more attainable, but it may not help. Abel Trujillo, whom Khabib fought in 2013, found this out the hard way, being taken down a total of [21 times in 15 minutes](http://bleacherreport.com/articles/1651923-ufc-160-results-khabib-nurmagomedov-sets-ufc-record-in-win-over-abel-trujillo). That is one successful takedown every 43 seconds(!). Neutralizing Khabib’s ground and pound attack will be crucial if Ferguson does find himself on his back, this being a five round fight, taking significant damage early is not an option.

Aside from the grueling nature of Tony Ferguson’s camps&mdash;something he has bragged about in the past&mdash;this time around he will also be recovering from elbow surgery. Ferguson underwent elbow surgery last December, taking advantage of his cancelled fight with Nurmagomedov&mdash;and Conor McGregor’s venture into boxing&mdash;to take care of a nagging injury under the knife. It’s naive to think Ferguson (or his camp) would agree to a fight if he is not fully recovered, but we have seen [this](http://mmaimports.com/2017/01/video-tony-fergusons-deadlifting-form-has-gone-viral-for-all-the-wrong-reasons/) video of him doing deadlifts. Take that for what you will.

## Common Opponents
All too often are common opponent matchups over analyzed, hyped up, and used to draw far-reaching conclusions. In the case of this fight, it may provide us a little more than useless rhetoric.

Michael Johnson is one of only two opponents that Nurmagomedov and Ferguson share. For the latter, it marks the last time he was defeated inside the octagon, coming via a 3 round decision loss back in May 2012. A fight in which Ferguson broke his arm in and continued fighting. For Nurmagomedov, Johnson looks like just another dominant win on his unblemished record. Yet, the fight answered a question all MMA fans and media members had. What would happen if someone were to hurt Nurmagomedov? How would he react?

Johnson was able to land several clean combinations in the first round of their fight, at times appearing to have hurt Nurmagomedov. This apparent vulnerability was quickly erased from memory as Nurmagomedov began to take Johnson down at will, battering him for the remaining two and a half rounds, before mercifully finishing him with a Kimura in the third round.

At around 7,000 feet above sea level, Mexico City is a cardio nightmare for fighters. In late 2016, amid his current win streak, Ferguson faced former UFC lightweight champion Rafael Dos Anjos in the Mexican capital. Giving us a 5 round thriller, eventually earning both men Fight of the Night bonuses. Ferguson was able to keep an unrelenting pace throughout the fight, eventually busting up Dos Anjos on the feet to secure the unanimous decision victory. The win didn’t come without some push-back, with Dos Anjos keeping good pressure and keeping the fight close through the early rounds.

Three years prior, in a shorter three round fight, Khabib Nurmagomedov dominated Dos Anjos. Delivering what we have now come to know as a vintage Khabib performance, and winning a unanimous decision. Dos Anjos, known for his high-level ground game[^4] had no answer for Nurmagomedov’s incessant pressure, takedowns, and ground and pound.

## The Numbers
Statistics in mixed martial arts are in their infancy, providing us only the most basic level of insight into a fighter’s performance. Nevertheless, the statistics are grim for “El Cucuy”. The striking numbers are the most positive for Ferguson, who absorbs 3.48 strikes per minute, to Nurmagomedov’s 1.52. But he also lands at a slightly higher clip, 5.09, to Nurmagomedov’s 4.11. The grappling numbers, however, are predictably lopsided, with Nurmagomedov averaging 5.85 takedowns per 15 minutes, to Ferguson’s .64. Takedown defense is slightly less discouraging, with Ferguson posting a 76% takedown defense success rate, to Khabib’s 83%. The numbers seem to be in line with what we already knew, Khabib is largely dominant on the ground, with Ferguson employing a more mixed approach.[^5]

Vegas seems to agree with the overall consensus, having Ferguson listed as the +210 underdog, placing Nurmagomedov as the clear betting favorite at -250 at the time of writing. It’s worth noting that the line will move significantly as the fight inches closer, as is often the case with these things.

Never for a lack of animosity between the two fighters&mdash;or eagerness from the fans&mdash;did this fight fall apart. Now more than ever does it feel inevitable, but more importantly, it feels&mdash;likely. For both men, the path to victory starts by winning the battle with themselves. In the case of this fight, picking a winner seems all too hopeful. If we finally see a fight between the two, we can all consider ourselves winners.

---

[^1]: Which we shouldn’t.
[^2]: I’m not proud of this either.
[^3]: Not to be confused with the NCAA.
[^4]: And because he's very good.
[^5]: Numbers courtesy of [FightMetric](http://www.fightmetric.com/).